-------------------
But on the days when she had to parch grain for Pandit
Udaybhan Pandey, the owner of the village, she went to bed hungry. People went to Panditji and asked him to
give the order for the old woman's oven to be rebuilt and the fire once more
lighted, but he paid no attention to them. 'If you’re going to stay in the village you'll have to do my chores. He kicked at the trough again but she ran in front of it
and took the kick in her side. She had to
keep stopping from the parching in order to keep the oven fire going. Bhungi was energetically rebuilding it with balls of clay Most
likely she'd spent the night at this work and wanted to finish it before the sun
was high. With this command the servants went away and Bhungi began to parch the
grain. Here she had
known the sorrows and pleasures of life; she could not give it up now in the
last days. ‘To his attendants he said, 'Go get a pile of leaves right
away and set fire to the whole thing; we'll show her how to make an oven. By now the
whole village was in a panic. She would stack the leaves right next to the oven, and after
twelve, light the fire. I can't do your work just for the
sake of staying in the village. The result was that that night the oven was dug up and Bhungi was left
without a means of livelihood. And, for this reason, from time to time the oven
was not lit. It was already
after twelve and even by sunset, she would not have time to parch so much
grain. Now she would have to stay at the oven parching until after dark for
no payment. She lived in the Pandit's village, therefore he had full authority to
make her do any sort of odd job. He was doing her a favour, in fact, by letting her live in the village at all. They began to band together to put out the fire
but the sprinkle of water acted like oil on it and the flames kept mounting
higher. No fire was lit in the houses Bhungi's oven was being put to good
use today. She knew that she was going against the Pandit's wishes, but she
hoped that he had forgotten his anger by then.
